### Programming and Scripting 2021 - Project - Iris Dataset
The purpose of this repository is to document the research and investigation of the well-known Iris Dataset. 

### Project Outline and Objectives
The project consisted of the following: 
* Research the Iris Dataset online and write a summary. 
* Download the Iris Dataset and add it to the repository. 
* Write a program called analysis.py that:  
  * Outputs a summary of each variable to a single text file. 
  * Save a histogram of each variable to .png files.
  * Output a scatter plot of each pair of variables. 

## 1. Introduction 

The Iris dataset, also known as the Fisher's Iris dataset was generated by Sir Ronald Fisher, a British statistician and biologist. The multivariate dataset was published in the 1936 paper titled "The use of Multiple Measurements in Taxonomic Problems". The purpose in the analysis of the data was to allow Fisher to develop and evaluate a linear discriminant model in order to distinguish between different species of the Iris flower based the measurement of certain attributes or features. 
In the paper, Fischer credited Dr. Edgar Anderson on gathering the data. Two of the three species were collected in the Gaspe Peninsula "all from the same pasture, and picked on the same day and measured at the same time by the same person with the same apparatus.[[1]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iris_flower_data_set#cite_note-anderson36-2)

The complete dataset consists of 150 rows, representing 50 samples taken for each of the selected Iris flower species (setosa, versicolor and virginica). For each sample, the sepal length, sepal width, petal length and petal width measurements in centimeters were obtained. These measurements are displayed in the dataset as a floating value. One species of the Iris flower (setosa) is considered to be linearly separable from the other two (versicolor and virginica), but the other two are not linearly separable from one another. 

This dataset is widely available online to download for analysis. It is considered a relatively simple dataset yet a very useful dataset for illustrating various ideas in data science and within machine learning. The dataset is often used in data mining, classification and clustering examples and to test algorithms. 

Similarly to the intent that Fisher had for the data, data models have been generated for machine learning where measurement data has been provided as an input, in order to predict the Iris species as an output.

## 2. Software Requirements 

* Operating System: Windows 10.
* Python (version 3.8) via Anaconda Individual Edition Installer
* Visual Studio Code (verion 1.55.2)
* GitHub
* Pandas
* Matplotlib
* Seaborn 

**Python**

Python is known as a powerful programming language, which was originally created by Guido van Rossum in late 1980, with its first release in 1991. Python has efficient high-level data structures and a simple but effective approach to object-orientated programming. It is an interpreted language, meaning that the code can be run as soon as it written. Due to the simple syntax, Python is a popular choice for beginner programmers and has several applications such as web development, machine learning, data analysis, scripting, game development and embedded application development. 

**Visual Studio Code**

Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is a source-code editor created by Microsoft, available on Windows, Linux and MacOS platforms. The application supports source code debugging, intelligent code completion, code snipping and embedded Git functionality to track code changes. VS Code also provides for the installation of extensions for added functionality and enhanced customization of the application for the user. 

**GitHub**

GitHub is a web-based version control and collaboration platform for software developers. The platform is based on Git, which is an open source code management system developed by Linus Torvalds (Linux Operating system creator). Its purpose is to store the source code for a project within one or more repositories, provide full traceability and complete history of all the changes to that code. GitHub is very useful for several developers collaborating together on a project and the management of any potential conflicting changes which may occur across the development team. 


**Pandas**

Pandas is an open source software library package developed for the Python programming language for analysis and manipulation of data. Pandas works perfectly well for data stored in a spreadsheet or database in a tabular form such as a comma separated values (csv), JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) and Structured Query Language (SQL) and Microsoft Excel. This type of data is referred to as a dataframe in pandas. 


**Matplotlib**

Matplotlib is a plotting library created for the Python programming language, with a similar design to MATLAB and utilises Numpy, the numerical extension of Python. It allows for quick visualization of data from Python by allowing various plot types to be built such as bar plot, box plot, histogram, pie chart and scatterplot. Matplotlib is included within the Anaconda installer package. 

**Seaborn** 

Seaborn is a Python data visualization library based on matplotlib, consisting of a high-level interface for creating informative statistical graphics. Seaborn is known to work well with Pandas dataframes. 




# Dataset Analysis 
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) is referred to as the understanding of the dataset by summarizing the main characteristics and plotting the data visually.  This is usually the first step in data analysis and will often assist in defining/verifying the problem statement or the definition on our data set. 

REF https://medium.com/@atanudan/exploratory-data-analysis-eda-in-python-893f963cc0c0

EDA was performed using pandas to load the dataset and gather statistical information, then Matploblib and Seaborn was used to generate the various plots and identify patterns across the data.  

Dataset Description: 
  
Firstly, basic descriptive information was obtained about the dataset such as determining the dataframe dimensionality, number of rows associated with each variable, displaying a sample of the data and the data types included within the dataset. A summary information table was also generated using the info function from the pandas library and null value check was performed. This analysis verified that the loading and interpretation of the dataset was successful in the pandas package, as the dataframe dimensionality and the summary table verified the presence of 150 rows with 5 columns. 4 columns contained the sepal and petal length and width measurements, which were identified as a float data type. The final column was characterized as an object datatype as it consisted of the 3 species of Iris. The count function filtered by species showing that the dataset contained equal quantities of sample data across the 3 species, showing 50 rows for each of the Iris species. The null value check confirmed that no null values were present within the dataset. One row of values was identified as a duplicated from the virginica species. 

















